README.rst, before:


GloMPO
######

============
Introduction
============

GloMPO (**Glo**\bally **M**\anaged **P**\arallel **O**\ptimisation) is a meta-optimizer
which supervises parallel sets of traditional optimization routines using customisable
heuristics. By monitoring the performance of each of these optimizers in real time,
the GloMPO manager is able to make decisions to terminate and start new optimizers in
better locations.

GloMPO is designed to be used on multimodal black-box optimization problems but simpler
problems are not precluded.

The three main advantages to optimization in this way:

1. Optimizers are pushed out of local minima, thus better solutions are more likely
   to be found;

2. Through terminations of optimizers stuck in local minima, the overall computational
   cost of the optimization can be significantly reduced;

3. The use of multiple optimizers allows multiple competitive/equivalent solutions to
   be found.

============
Installation
============

GloMPO is currently hosted on `Github <https://github.com/mfgustavo/glompo.git>`_ as
a private repository. Contact michael.freitasgustavo@ugent.be for access.

1. Installation is easy after download:

   * Using pip:

     .. code-block:: bash

        cd /path/to/glompo
        pip install .

   * Using conda:

     .. code-block:: bash

        cd /path/to/glompo
        conda install .

2. Both ``pip`` and ``conda`` will only install core GloMPO dependencies,
   Packages required for optional features must be installed manually. These
   features and their dependencies can be consulted in the ``extra_requires``
   option of ``setup.py``.

3. Tests are available in the ``tests`` folder and split into core tests and plotting
   related tests which are optional features. Running the tests requires ``pytest``
   be installed to your Python environment. This is not installed automatically with
   GloMPO.

   Depending on the abilities of the system core and scope tests can be run together
   or independently:

   .. code-block:: bash

     cd glompo/glompo
     pytest tests
     # or
     pytest tests/core_tests
     pytest tests/scope_tests

   NOTE: core_tests will only test optional components if the required packages are
   installed.

=====
Usage
=====

Basic Example
=============

Usage of GloMPO requires, at a minimum, specification of the task to be minimised,
the bounds of the parameters and the local optimizers to be used.

GloMPO includes a set of common multidimensional global optimization test functions
which are useful to benchmark different configurations of the manager. In this example
the Shubert function will be used.

.. code-block:: python

 from glompo import GloMPOManager
 from glompo.opt_selectors import CycleSelector
 from glompo.optimizers import CMAOptimizer  # Requires cma package
 from glompo.benchmark_fnc import Shubert

 task = Shubert()

 manager = GloMPOManager(task=task,
                         opt_selector=CycleSelector([CMAOptimizer]),
                         bounds=task.bounds)

 result = manager.start_manager()

 print(f"Minimum found: {result.fx}")

For a more sophisticated setup with specially configured hunting and convergence
components consult the documentation in ``core/manager.py``

Logging
=======

Logging is built into GloMPO and users may optional configure its logging capability
before running the manager in order to track its progress. Without this manual
configuration the opt_log will not print anywhere! This is mainly used to debug the
code and track execution through the program but it is helpful to send INFO level
messages to the stdout to follow the execution process.

The logging provided in this way is distinct from the summary opt_log-file provided
at the end of the GloMPO run and regulated by the summary_files parameter in
the ``__init__`` method.

The GloMPO logger is called ``glompo`` and components have individual loggers too,
allowing filtering if desired. These are: ``glompo.manager``, ``glompo.checker``,
``glompo.scope``, ``glompo.logger``, ``glompo.generator``, ``glompo.hunter``,
``glompo.selector`` and ``glompo.optimizers``. Logging from optimizers can be
accessed collectively via ``glompo.optimizers`` or individually for each optimizer
via ``glompo.optimizers.optX`` where X is the ID number of the optimizer
(see common/logging.py for a useful Filter which automatically redirects new
optimizers to new log files).

Within user written plug-ins such as custom hunters and convergence criteria, a
``self.logger`` attribute is present and can be used to log behaviour.

An example configuration may look like:

.. code-block:: python

  formatter = logging.Formatter("%(asctime)s : %(levelname)s : %(lineno)d : %(name)s :: %(message)s")

  handler = logging.FileHandler('glompo.opt_log', 'w')
  handler.setFormatter(formatter)

  logger = logging.getLogger('glompo')
  logger.addHandler(handler)
  logger.setLevel('INFO')

  manager = GloMPOManager(...)
  manager.start_manager(...)

Resource Balancing
==================

Resource balancing is critical to GloMPO's success. The typical GloMPO execution
hierarchy takes the following form:

.. image:: _png/hierarchy.png

The first level of parallelization is done at the manager level and controls how the
optimizer routines are spun-off from the manager. This can be done using multiprocessing
or multithreading and is controlled by sending 'processes' or 'threads' to
the `backend` parameter of the GloMPOManager initialisation method. Processes are
preferable to threads as they sidestep Python's Global Interpreter Lock but there are
scenarios where this is inappropriate.

The second level of parallelization is optimizer specific and present in swarm type
optimizers like CMA which require multiple function evaluations per optimizer iteration.
These too can generally be evaluated in parallel using processes or threads.
This can be configured by sending `common.futures.BaseExecutor` classes to the
`backend` parameter of `BaseOptimizer` objects during initialisation. To avoid crashes
(see table below) GloMPO defaults to threading at this level.

In the case where the function being minimized is in pure python (and there are no
calls to processes outside of python or calculations based on I/O calls) then load
balancing will become challenging due to Python's own limitations:

=========  =========  =====
Parallelization       Setup
--------------------  -----
Level 1    Level 2
=========  =========  =====
Threads    Threads    Total lock within a single Python process due to the GIL. No parallelism can be achieved unless the bulk of the calculation time is spent in an external subprocess.
Threads    Processes  Heavy burden on single process to run the manager and optimizer routines but the load can be adequately distributed over all available resources if the function evaluations are slow enough that the single manager / optimizers process does not become a bottleneck.
Processes  Threads    Not advisable. Processes are launched for each optimizer but parallel function evaluations (which should be more expensive than the optimization routine itself) is threaded to no benefit due to the GIL.
Processes  Processes  Theoretically the ideal scenario which guarantees perfect parallelism and full use of available resources. However, Python does not allow daemonic processes (optimizers) to spawn children (parallel function evaluations). Turning off daemonic spawning of optimizers is risky as it is possible they will not be cleanup if the manager crashes. GloMPO does, however, do its best to deal with this eventuality but there are scenarios where children are not collected.
=========  =========  =====

.. note::
   We emphasize here that these difficulties only arise when attempting to load balance
   over two parallelization levels.

As explained in the above table achieving process parallelism at both levels is not
straightforward but GloMPO does support an avenue to do this, however, its use is
**not recommended**: the user may send `'processes_forced'` to the `backend` parameter
of the GloMPO manager initialisation. This will spawn optimizers non-daemonically.

 .. warning::
    This method is **not recommended**. It is unsafe to spawn non-daemonic
    processes since these expensive routines will not be shutdown if the manager
    were to crash. The user would have to terminate them manually.

Manual Control
==============

GloMPO supports manual control of optimizer termination. The user may create stop
files in the working directory which, when detected by the manager, will shutdown
the chosen optimizer.

Files must be called `STOP_x` where `x` is the optimizer ID number. This file name
is case-sensitive. Examples include `STOP_1` or `STOP_003`. Note that these files
should be empty as they are deleted by the manager once processed.

Execution Information
=====================

GloMPO logs include information about CPU usage, memory usage and system load. This
is useful traceback to ensure the function is being parallelized correctly. It is
important to note that CPU usage and memory usage is provided at a *process level*
system load is provided at a *system level*. This means that the system load
information will only be of use if GloMPO is the only application running over the
entire system. In distributed computing systems where GloMPO is only given access to
a portion of a node, this information will be useless as it will be conflated with
the usage of other users.

Checkpointing
=============

Checkpointing tries to create an entire image of the GloMPO state, it is the user's
responsibility to ensure that the used optimizers are restartable. Within
`tests/test_optimizers.py` there is the `TestSubclassesGlompoCompatible` class which
can be used to ensure an optimizer is compatible with all of GloMPO's functionality.

The optimization task can sometimes not be reduced to a pickled state depending on
it complexity and interfaces to other codes. GloMPO will first attempt to `pickle`
the object, failing that GloMPO will attempt to call the `checkpoint_save()` function if
the task has such a method. If this also fails the checkpoint is created without the
optimization task. GloMPO can be restarted from an incomplete checkpoint if the
missing components are provided.

Commit message:

Formalisation of minimization task API

README.rst, after:


GloMPO
######

============
Introduction
============

GloMPO (**Glo**\bally **M**\anaged **P**\arallel **O**\ptimisation) is a meta-optimizer
which supervises parallel sets of traditional optimization routines using customisable
heuristics. By monitoring the performance of each of these optimizers in real time,
the GloMPO manager is able to make decisions to terminate and start new optimizers in
better locations.

GloMPO is designed to be used on multimodal black-box optimization problems but simpler
problems are not precluded.

The three main advantages to optimization in this way:

1. Optimizers are pushed out of local minima, thus better solutions are more likely
   to be found;

2. Through terminations of optimizers stuck in local minima, the overall computational
   cost of the optimization can be significantly reduced;

3. The use of multiple optimizers allows multiple competitive/equivalent solutions to
   be found.

============
Installation
============

GloMPO is currently hosted on `Github <https://github.com/mfgustavo/glompo.git>`_ as
a private repository. Contact michael.freitasgustavo@ugent.be for access.

1. Installation is easy after download:

   * Using pip:

     .. code-block:: bash

        cd /path/to/glompo
        pip install .

   * Using conda:

     .. code-block:: bash

        cd /path/to/glompo
        conda install .

2. Both ``pip`` and ``conda`` will only install core GloMPO dependencies,
   Packages required for optional features must be installed manually. These
   features and their dependencies can be consulted in the ``extra_requires``
   option of ``setup.py``.

3. Tests are available in the ``tests`` folder and split into core tests and plotting
   related tests which are optional features. Running the tests requires ``pytest``
   be installed to your Python environment. This is not installed automatically with
   GloMPO.

   Depending on the abilities of the system core and scope tests can be run together
   or independently:

   .. code-block:: bash

     cd glompo/glompo
     pytest tests
     # or
     pytest tests/core_tests
     pytest tests/scope_tests

   NOTE: core_tests will only test optional components if the required packages are
   installed.

=====
Usage
=====

Basic Example
=============

Usage of GloMPO requires, at a minimum, specification of the task to be minimised,
the bounds of the parameters and the local optimizers to be used.

GloMPO includes a set of common multidimensional global optimization test functions
which are useful to benchmark different configurations of the manager. In this example
the Shubert function will be used.

.. code-block:: python

 from glompo import GloMPOManager
 from glompo.opt_selectors import CycleSelector
 from glompo.optimizers import CMAOptimizer  # Requires cma package
 from glompo.benchmark_fnc import Shubert

 task = Shubert()

 manager = GloMPOManager(task=task,
                         opt_selector=CycleSelector([CMAOptimizer]),
                         bounds=task.bounds)

 result = manager.start_manager()

 print(f"Minimum found: {result.fx}")

For a more sophisticated setup with specially configured hunting and convergence
components consult the documentation in ``core/manager.py``

Optimization Tasks
==================

To allow for the maximum flexibility and interfacing with complex codes,
GloMPO has only a single API specification for the minimization task; the task
must take the form ``function(x: Sequence[float]) -> float``. In this case,
``function`` may be a function or the ``__call__`` method of an object.

Occasionally more information or flexibility is required. In these cases
``function`` must be an object which includes a
``detailed_call(x: Sequence[float]) -> float, Any, ...`` method over and above
the ``__call__`` method. The first element returned by ``detailed_call`` must be
the function value being minimized. All subsequent returns can take whichever form
is appropriate. This extra information may be required by certain kinds of
optimizers, or can be included in logs for future processing. For example, the
GFLS optimizer requires residuals rather than function evaluations in its
algorithm. Alternatively, when reparameterizing a model against a training set
it may be useful to simultaneously log the error of validation set.

A final optional specification is including the method
``detailed_call_header() -> Sequence[str]``. This will print the output in the
first line of the logfile rather than using an uninformative default.

Logging
=======

Logging is built into GloMPO and users may optional configure its logging capability
before running the manager in order to track its progress. Without this manual
configuration the opt_log will not print anywhere! This is mainly used to debug the
code and track execution through the program but it is helpful to send INFO level
messages to the stdout to follow the execution process.

The logging provided in this way is distinct from the summary opt_log-file provided
at the end of the GloMPO run and regulated by the summary_files parameter in
the ``__init__`` method.

The GloMPO logger is called ``glompo`` and components have individual loggers too,
allowing filtering if desired. These are: ``glompo.manager``, ``glompo.checker``,
``glompo.scope``, ``glompo.logger``, ``glompo.generator``, ``glompo.hunter``,
``glompo.selector`` and ``glompo.optimizers``. Logging from optimizers can be
accessed collectively via ``glompo.optimizers`` or individually for each optimizer
via ``glompo.optimizers.optX`` where X is the ID number of the optimizer
(see common/logging.py for a useful Filter which automatically redirects new
optimizers to new log files).

Within user written plug-ins such as custom hunters and convergence criteria, a
``self.logger`` attribute is present and can be used to log behaviour.

An example configuration may look like:

.. code-block:: python

  formatter = logging.Formatter("%(asctime)s : %(levelname)s : %(lineno)d : %(name)s :: %(message)s")

  handler = logging.FileHandler('glompo.opt_log', 'w')
  handler.setFormatter(formatter)

  logger = logging.getLogger('glompo')
  logger.addHandler(handler)
  logger.setLevel('INFO')

  manager = GloMPOManager(...)
  manager.start_manager(...)

Resource Balancing
==================

Resource balancing is critical to GloMPO's success. The typical GloMPO execution
hierarchy takes the following form:

.. image:: _png/hierarchy.png

The first level of parallelization is done at the manager level and controls how the
optimizer routines are spun-off from the manager. This can be done using multiprocessing
or multithreading and is controlled by sending 'processes' or 'threads' to
the `backend` parameter of the GloMPOManager initialisation method. Processes are
preferable to threads as they sidestep Python's Global Interpreter Lock but there are
scenarios where this is inappropriate.

The second level of parallelization is optimizer specific and present in swarm type
optimizers like CMA which require multiple function evaluations per optimizer iteration.
These too can generally be evaluated in parallel using processes or threads.
This can be configured by sending `common.futures.BaseExecutor` classes to the
`backend` parameter of `BaseOptimizer` objects during initialisation. To avoid crashes
(see table below) GloMPO defaults to threading at this level.

In the case where the function being minimized is in pure python (and there are no
calls to processes outside of python or calculations based on I/O calls) then load
balancing will become challenging due to Python's own limitations:

=========  =========  =====
Parallelization       Setup
--------------------  -----
Level 1    Level 2
=========  =========  =====
Threads    Threads    Total lock within a single Python process due to the GIL. No parallelism can be achieved unless the bulk of the calculation time is spent in an external subprocess.
Threads    Processes  Heavy burden on single process to run the manager and optimizer routines but the load can be adequately distributed over all available resources if the function evaluations are slow enough that the single manager / optimizers process does not become a bottleneck.
Processes  Threads    Not advisable. Processes are launched for each optimizer but parallel function evaluations (which should be more expensive than the optimization routine itself) is threaded to no benefit due to the GIL.
Processes  Processes  Theoretically the ideal scenario which guarantees perfect parallelism and full use of available resources. However, Python does not allow daemonic processes (optimizers) to spawn children (parallel function evaluations). Turning off daemonic spawning of optimizers is risky as it is possible they will not be cleanup if the manager crashes. GloMPO does, however, do its best to deal with this eventuality but there are scenarios where children are not collected.
=========  =========  =====

.. note::
   We emphasize here that these difficulties only arise when attempting to load balance
   over two parallelization levels.

As explained in the above table achieving process parallelism at both levels is not
straightforward but GloMPO does support an avenue to do this, however, its use is
**not recommended**: the user may send `'processes_forced'` to the `backend` parameter
of the GloMPO manager initialisation. This will spawn optimizers non-daemonically.

 .. warning::
    This method is **not recommended**. It is unsafe to spawn non-daemonic
    processes since these expensive routines will not be shutdown if the manager
    were to crash. The user would have to terminate them manually.

Manual Control
==============

GloMPO supports manual control of optimizer termination. The user may create stop
files in the working directory which, when detected by the manager, will shutdown
the chosen optimizer.

Files must be called `STOP_x` where `x` is the optimizer ID number. This file name
is case-sensitive. Examples include `STOP_1` or `STOP_003`. Note that these files
should be empty as they are deleted by the manager once processed.

Execution Information
=====================

GloMPO logs include information about CPU usage, memory usage and system load. This
is useful traceback to ensure the function is being parallelized correctly. It is
important to note that CPU usage and memory usage is provided at a *process level*
system load is provided at a *system level*. This means that the system load
information will only be of use if GloMPO is the only application running over the
entire system. In distributed computing systems where GloMPO is only given access to
a portion of a node, this information will be useless as it will be conflated with
the usage of other users.

Checkpointing
=============

Checkpointing tries to create an entire image of the GloMPO state, it is the user's
responsibility to ensure that the used optimizers are restartable. Within
`tests/test_optimizers.py` there is the `TestSubclassesGlompoCompatible` class which
can be used to ensure an optimizer is compatible with all of GloMPO's functionality.

The optimization task can sometimes not be reduced to a pickled state depending on
it complexity and interfaces to other codes. GloMPO will first attempt to `pickle`
the object, failing that GloMPO will attempt to call the `checkpoint_save()` function if
the task has such a method. If this also fails the checkpoint is created without the
optimization task. GloMPO can be restarted from an incomplete checkpoint if the
missing components are provided.
